[ACP-185] Update Validator Manager (#186)
avalanche-foundation/ACPs: ACPs/186-update-validator-manager/Readme.md

| ACP           | 186                                                 |
| :------------ | :-------------------------------------------------- |
| **Title**     | Update Validator Manager                            |
| **Author(s)** | [Martin Eckardt](https://github.com/martineckardt)  |
| **Status**    | Proposed                                            |
| **Track**     | Standards                                           |
| **Related**   | [ACP-77](https://github.com/avalanche-foundation/ACPs/blob/main/ACPs/77-reinventing-subnets/README.md)       |

## Abstract

> This ACP proposes an extension to ACP-77 by introducing a new transaction type `UpdateValidatorManagerTx` to facilitate validator manager migration and upgrading without requiring proxy contracts or network upgrades. This enhancement allows L1s to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ACP proposes an extension to [ACP-77](https://github.com/avalanche-foundation/ACPs/blob/main/ACPs/77-reinventing-subnets/README.md)  by introducing a new transaction type `UpdateValidatorManagerTx` to facilitate validator manager migration and upgrading without requiring proxy contracts or network upgrades. This enhancement allows L1s to:
```

- Migrate validator management between different chains (e.g., from C-Chain to a native L1)

> - Recover from misconfigurations where validator managers were set to inaccessible chains

Reviewer: is this referring to an instance where the validator management contract is deployed on a chain that may have stopped building blocks? if so I suggest:
```suggestion
- Recover from incidents where the validator manager address was set to a chain that has halted or become corrupted
```

Author: I was also referring to situations where the validator manager chain ID was set to the P-Chain. Another problem would arise if the validator manager was pointing to the wrong address on the C-Chain . If the latter happened on your L1 you could put a validator manager in the state there with a network upgrade, but that cannot be done on the C-Chain.

- Avoid the need for proxy contracts and their associated security concerns
- Implement smooth upgrade paths without requiring network upgrades

> By providing a flexible mechanism for validator manager migration, this proposal significantly enhances the sovereignty and adaptability of Avalanche L1s.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By providing a flexible mechanism for validator manager migration, this proposal significantly enhances the sovereignty, security, and adaptability of Avalanche L1s.
```

    // - Must not be the Primary Network ID
    Subnet ids.ID `json:"subnetID"`
    // BlockchainID where the validator manager lives
    ChainID ids.ID `json:"chainID"`
    // Address of the validator manager
    Address []byte `json:"address"`
    // Initial continuous-fee-paying validators for the L1
    Validators []L1Validator `json:"validators"`
    // Authorizes this conversion
    SubnetAuth verify.Verifiable `json:"subnetAuthorization"`
}
```

Currently, standard tools like AvaCloud, Avalanche CLI, and L1 Launcher typically recommend deploying proxy contracts via genesis to ensure the validator manager can be upgraded. This proxy-based approach introduces several challenges:

1. **Centralization of Power**: The proxy owner has extensive control over the validator set through the ability to change the validator manager implementation - essentially equivalent to a Proof-of-Authority admin even for Proof-of-Stake chains.

2. **Chain Migration Barriers**: The validator manager cannot move between chains. Projects like Beam that wish to start by managing their validator set on the C-Chain before eventually moving to their own L1 face a significant roadblock.

> 3. **No Recovery Path for Misconfiguration**: There is currently no recovery path for L1s that accidentally set their validator manager chainID to a chain they cannot control. While L1s can modify contract code on their own chain via a network upgrade, there is no recovery mechanism when the manager is set to an external chain. There have been instances of production L1s that nearly set their validator manager chainID to the P-Chain chainID, which would have rendered them permanently unrecoverable.

Reviewer 2: Nearly set the chainID to the P-Chain chainID in the Validator Manager contract, or in the tx to the P-Chain? In either case, should we add a defensive check against this since it's invalid?

Author: This specific case was on the P-Chain. I am chatting with Stephen about a separate ACP to protect against this

These limitations constrain L1 flexibility, create security risks, and impose unnecessary technical debt on projects building on Avalanche. A more flexible approach would significantly enhance the L1 ecosystem's resilience and adaptability.

## Specification

To address these challenges, this ACP proposes a new transaction type `UpdateValidatorManagerTx` that allows an L1 to update its validator manager without requiring proxy contracts or network upgrades.

### New P-Chain Transaction Type

#### `UpdateValidatorManagerTx`

> The `UpdateValidatorManagerTx` will allow an L1 to update its validator manager contract address and chain ID:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `UpdateValidatorManagerTx` will allow an L1 to update its validator manager contract address and `ChainID`:
```

```golang
type UpdateValidatorManagerTx struct {
    // Metadata, inputs and outputs
    BaseTx
    // ID of the L1 to update the validator manager for
    // Restrictions:
    // - Must not be the Primary Network ID
    // - Must be an L1 (previously converted via ConvertSubnetToL1Tx)
    SubnetID ids.ID `json:"subnetID"`
    // New BlockchainID where the validator manager will live
    // Restrictions:

>     // - Cannot be the P-Chain chain ID

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // - Cannot be the P-Chain ChainID
```

- `newChainID` and `newAddress` identify the new validator manager
- `expiry` is the time at which this message becomes invalid. As of a P-Chain timestamp `>= expiry`, this Avalanche Warp Message can no longer be used to update the validator manager

For the message to be considered valid, it must be signed by validators representing at least 67% of the L1's total stake weight.

#### `L1ValidatorManagerUpdatedMessage`

The P-Chain produces an `L1ValidatorManagerUpdatedMessage` when an L1's validator manager has been updated to confirm the change to the L1 and its validators.

The `L1ValidatorManagerUpdatedMessage` is specified as an `AddressedCall` with `sourceChainID` set to the P-Chain ID, the `sourceAddress` set to an empty byte array, and a payload of:

```golang
type L1ValidatorManagerUpdatedMessage struct {
    // Codec ID is the codec version used to serialize the payload
    CodecID uint16 `json:"codecID"`
    // TypeID is the payload type identifier (0x00000005 for this message)
    TypeID uint32 `json:"typeID"`
    // SubnetID identifies the L1 whose validator manager was updated
    SubnetID ids.ID `json:"subnetID"`

>     // OldChainID identifies the blockchain where the old validator manager lived
>     OldChainID ids.ID `json:"oldChainID"`
>     // OldAddress is the address of the old validator manager
>     OldAddress []byte `json:"oldAddress"`
>     // NewChainID identifies the blockchain where the new validator manager lives
>     NewChainID ids.ID `json:"newChainID"`
>     // NewAddress is the address of the new validator manager
>     NewAddress []byte `json:"newAddress"`

Reviewer: Not sure that both the old and the new chain information needs to be conveyed by the update message, it should be enough to provide a boolean and the current active manager and address. This follows the precedent set in [ACP-77](https://github.com/avalanche-foundation/ACPs/tree/main/ACPs/77-reinventing-subnets#l1validatorregistrationmessage) by `L1ValidatorRegistrationMessage`, wherein, "`registered` is a boolean representing the status of the validationID. If true, the validationID corresponds to a validator in the current validator set. If false, the validationID does not correspond to a validator in the current validator set, and never will in the future."

```suggestion
    // AddressUpdateID identifies attempted change in validator manager address and/or chainID for the message
    AddressUpdateID ids.ID `json:"addressUpdateID"`
    // Updated returns true if the validator manager `Address` has been updated
    Updated boolean `json:"updated"`
    // ChainID identifies the blockchainID of the active validator manager contract
    ChainID ids.ID `json:"chainID"`
    // Address identifies the contract address of the active validator manager contract
    Address []byte `json:"address"`
```
In this instance, `Updated` is a boolean representing the status of the `AddressUpdateID`. If true, the addressUpdateID corresponds to the current active `Address` and `ChainID`. If false, the `AddressUpdateID` does not correspond to these values, and never will in the future.

Author: I was thinking to include both to mage the migration from one validator manager contract to the other easier. If this was a PoS staking manager that was holding funds, having this very explicit message would allow designing a trustless migration where in a single transaction the old validator manager can be deactivated and instructed to move the funds to the validator manager. If there is ambiguity of what exactly happened on the P-Chain the migration process may need a trusted actor

    // ValidatorList is the serialized list of validators at the time of update

>     ValidatorList []ValidatorData `json:"validatorList"`

Reviewer: shouldn't this be
```
Validators []L1Validator `json:"validators"`
```

Author: It reuses the same data type as the conversion message. Updated the ACP to use the exact naming and refer to the current implementation

https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/blob/d36f7d392bdae99a68ced5c4f6ef345ff3ce25da/vms/platformvm/warp/message/subnet_to_l1_conversion.go#L25C19-L25C52
